Maran bishar though alzer's senior
political analyst he joins us now by
Skype from Paris Marwan is this a
milestone moment that we will look back
on in days to come and say perhaps this
was a turning
point well certainly uh in terms of uh
the icj and in terms of the legal status
of the occupied territories and in terms
of the various details or detailed
drooling that we've heard it's it's
a it's a Cornerstone it's it's
definitely a a game changer legally
speaking not that it's surprising or
shocking it's in fact if anything this
is basically expanding and deepening the
ruling of
2004 uh that was mentioned today about
the illegality of the aparted wall in
the West Bank uh but I think the
importance uh of this ruling today is
just how damning how
detailed uh it is and it just covers all
those issues that some of us like you
and I and others for example in the
media and Academia that had to uh deal
with the headache for example of always
having to read the disputed territories
when we all understood them to be
occupied territories but they said ah
you know the legal definition is not
clear well now now no one can debate I
think that debate should be put to rest
that these are occupied territories more
importantly it's not just the West Bank
as in the 2004 ruling now we're talking
about one territorial Unity that is
occupied territory and that is Gaza so
again Gaza is an occupied territory the
West Bank
and very importantly East Jerusalem that
was annexed by Israel since we are
talking about the totality of the
occupied Palestinian T That Couldn't
that are indivisible if you will under
international law that's also hugely
important so that means the United
States recognition of Israel's
annexation or or moving its capital to
Jerusalem that's illegal now and and
definitely the US should reconsider uh
that because the ruling basically uh
told everyone that assist or anyone that
would assist in recognition of any of
the de facto policies including the
annexations in the in the occupied
territories that they are illegal and
that they would be in violations of
international law there a lot to unpack
Maran TR to take them one by one but
first of all this is coming at a time
when there is a war going on in Gaza we
know that this of course this case is
not addressing and the court made it
very clear it's not addressing the
events post October the 6th 2023
however do you see that it does have
some
implications now that the court has as
as you noted as well it has repeated and
said Gaza is an occupied territory part
of the occupied Palestinian territory so
all the considerations the calculations
about whether Israel is or is not acting
quote unquote in self-defense in Gaza or
whether it's an occupying power do you
see some implications in this finding by
the international court of justice
today there's absolutely uh certain
implications on a number of levels while
the court did recognize that Israel did
withdraw its illegal settlers and it the
and its military physically from uh the
Gaza Strip but it remained an occupying
power because it could still use its
Authority or its coercive policies in
the Gaza or on the Gaza Strip having
basically occupied the borders and the
skies and and and the lands and so on so
forth so uh in so many ways Gaza as I
said and as the icj ruled is part and
parcel of the occupied territories and I
think one of the more important elements
that certainly applies is this coercive
inducement uh of uh uh expulsion
basically of inducing people to leave
which is another form of transfer which
as the court recognized is also illegal
and nowhere that we've seen the past
nine months more of this coercive
inducement making Gaza
unlivable
uninhabitable as Gaza so you could
definitely say that there's a number of
the issues here that certainly are
applicable to Gaza but I think probably
the IJ might be um uh saving it's ruling
on the on the on what's really happening
in Gaza the genocide in Gaza for a
latter date uh we are all been occupied
Sam as you know the past nine months
with what's going on in Gaza while the
other Battleground the other genocide
the other war crimes were actually
happening in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem where the real theft of land
the real annexations the real reward if
you will for the criminals in the
Israeli government is which is really
the West Bank and the Cosmopolitan or
the Metropole of uh e Jerusalem and
that's where most of the violations are
happening basically uh you know in the
shadow of the war crimes in Gaza so
underlining all of that today with such
Clarity certainly puts the Israeli
government on the defensive it basically
has no defense but it also and that's
important puts the uh you know its
backers in London Berlin and and
Washington also in the defensive now I'm
not sure as your previous guest would
have said that this is going to change
anyone's mind in Washington let alone
Trump if he does make it after November
but I think as Netanyahu is being now
met with cheers in Washington in both
houses of
Congress uh next week I think probably
now the general assembly of the United
Nations the world's
Parliament should start taking measures
just as Netanyahu is re in Washington
it's about time to
freeze
Israel is its membership at the United
Nation and the UN General assem Assembly
is capable of doing that just as it did
to South Africa after such a ruling it
has every possible reason capacity and I
would say moral and legal obligation to
freeze Israel's membership at the United
Nations Maran putting aside maybe
looking into the crystal all of what
Donald Trump may or may not do but
beyond him in the wider Circles of power
in the west do you see at all any
potential for change in the political
calculus that without which would leave
those countries in a very awkward
position of being on the one hand the
countries that preach to Russia respect
for international law and calling on it
to end occupation in Ukraine but on the
other hand continue to support what the
is CJ is just called an illegal
occupation of Palestinian territories
and continue to send it weapons and arms
even there's no doubt that I and
countless people around the world nor
Less in Palestine wish it but I don't
but or I do rather want to distinguish
between wishing and wishful thinking so
I think there is a a lot of room uh for
hoping that this ruling will support
a a movement an international movement
across the board in the west and
elsewhere in the world in favor of more
sanctions more pressure on Western
governments to put more pressure in
Israel in favor of embarrassing and
humiliating those who continue to
support Israel's illegal unlawful
occupation annexation settlement those
who continue to trade uh with the
Israeli settlements like for example
here in the European Union but certainly
the United States even certain now
Middle Eastern countries I think that
all will startop putting pressure on a
number of governments to do so having
said that I also want to underline
something very important you know they
say one of the maxims of of
international law is Justice delayed is
Justice denied we're talking about now
almost 60 years six Decades of more of
the same criminal illegal
unlawful discriminatory racist
occupation of
Palestine all right and still there are
those in London and Washington still
defending it or justifying Israel's
policies I think this ruling hopefully
will start changing some minds and
hearts and maybe sing around some of
those Pockets that continue to finance
Israel's apart all right that's Maran
bishara always a pleasure to have you
our senior political
analyst make sure to subscribe our
Channel channel to get the latest news
from alaz